---
layout: post
title: "It's all about learning to turn"
date: 2013-01-25
comments: true
tags: [training, driving, riding, motorbike, ski, control, agile, maintenance]

---

Recently, I went on a ski trip with a bunch of friends. Since, this was my first time doing any serious skiing I prudently invested in a ski lesson. At the ski lesson the instructor started with the basics. He spoke about how the ski boots should feel on your feet, how a ski is controlled by the least movements in your feet and legs. After the initial few lessons we actually started a little skiiing. In the sense that we actually moved forward 10s of feet at a time which was quite exciting. We were able to go up the conveyor and reach the bottom with our skis. Eventually we also learnt how to stop ourselves without running into the fence or other skiers.
Then came a very important part - learning to turn. It took the technique of stopping - making a decent wedge with a little pressure on the opposite side of the turn. "To turn left, put some pressure on the right ski" - said the instructor. This turned out to be significantly harder. Especially trying to control the amount of turn that was being generated with the slightest of pressure. As you can imagine I spent the rest of the day, trying to turn and when I failed I stopped. Learning to turn, taught me to stop better. 

After the ski session since my legs were so sore, I chose to do some snowmobiling and explore some more of the wilderness in the area. This was a less taxing experience as compared to the previous day. We were given all the required gear(which was more comfortable than the previous days ski gear). The instructor briefed us about the basics of riding the snowmobile and controlling where it goes, alongwith some etiquette on the trail.