---
layout: post
title: Preparing to be a trainer
tags: [trainer, speaking, prepare, thoughtworks university, sessions]
---

Preparing to be a trainer is more of a mental activity than physical. To
be one you would want to observe one and learn how they do it. I had the
opportunity of being trained by a set of great trainers/speakers and
also working them to understand how they prepared to be a trainer.
Mostly it is about being aware of the responsibility. It takes time to
get a feel for the amount of work that goes into being a trainer. To
facilitate this we started by studying the course material that was
already available (In a sense I was lucky that there was so much refined
course material available that I did not need to invest any time in
design the course. Designing a course is a major undertaking and can be
done only after much experience [\#feedback]).

Another thing you must do is actually be a co-trainer/teaching assistant
at a training session to get a feel of the mechanics of it all.(What
gets overlooked is the fact that managing time/schedule and training
content is harder than it appears.) To prepare to be such a person one
needs to know the complete training course. To be a developer trainer I
went through the exercise of reading all the material and also solving
and reasoning all the examples for the course. At times it also helps to
have multiple solutions at hand. In collaboration with other trainers
and trainees we have managed to have a repository of such sample
solutions that we are prepared with to hand out to trainees.

Once you have a grip on the course content you need to plan and replay
the plan of how the content will be presented. Pairing on course content
tremendously helps. In case of vast curriculum it helps to divide
responsibility between the pair to deliver certain topics based on
experience, enthusiasm and freshness of the trainer. Making a plan of
the day for every half hour slot helps get a feel of timeliness as well
as helps focus on delivering the most important message of the session
effectively. Rehearsing all this with a pair is greatly useful. We had
the opportunity to rehearse this training with the smaller group to time
ourselves as well as refine delivery of content. Understanding what
messages are to be delivering during the session and what content is to
be learnt after class/further exercise helps divide the content and
reduce course load.

There is a lot of physical activity involved too. To enhance retention
and recollection it may be a good idea to prepare homework/extra work
problems. Some students really gain a lot from working on these in their
spare time. A trick that also helps retention is ‘rinse and repeat’ - We
provided handouts of the most important messages of the session and
reviewed sessions at the end and few days later.

Preparing also needs to consider the amount of stationary required,
hardware required, accessories such as timers, props and power
availability at the venue.[\#venue]

Training is a lot of hard work. Do not jump in if you don’t thing 12
hour days + dinner + a night out are not something you can take. Not to
mention activities that require you to be available on a weekend.

1.  Prepare course content
2.  Plan out each day
3.  Rehearse
4.  Ensure retention by way of handouts or reviews
5.  Prepare the venue to suit the training

