---
layout: post
title: 'Letters to a new Software Developer'
tags:
  - new developer
  - learning
  - real world challenges
image: images/
---

I wrote up this short summary
In each of the 6 cases I will write up a short story from my past which helped me learn that side of software development.

## Letters to a new Software Developer

Over the course of years that I have been doing software development, I would say I have matured. Not in the sense of being a better person but in the terms of understanding context more and more about what is happening around me and how it affects the software(or work) I am doing at the time.
As a fresh graduate from college my impressions of software world were - we will be looking at problems in a different way and producing the most incredible solutions to them as we convert those problems into software code. As they say, defining the problem well is the first step to getting to the solution. And what could be better at defining the problem than a terse and reproducible language that a computer can understand. Right?
Well that naivete of mine has now been challenged so many times, and I am better for it. Here is an attempt to document some of these stories that may start with being trivial experiences but contained deep lessons within them.

### It does not end once you are done writing the code

As a student and as an engineer I developed the art of learning - doing something, improving it and keeping at it. Every engineering problem seems like it wants to be solved, elegantly as well. And thats how entered software engineering and development. When I started as an electrical engineer learning about distributed control systems and understanding how programming works in that context, I was excited about the possibilities. Initially it seemed like we are just entering the rules that are around us into software, but the ability to keep on changing those rules - because something changed or we learnt about it seemed to be limitless.

When I started on my first professional software project, it was all a very new experience to me. We were writing this great mortgage processing application, learning about different ARMs, different loans and building a system that understood the customer. It was all going well. We were building it on the latest technology at the time(it was .NET 2.0 back in the day). I was fortunate to have a team that was willing to take me in and teach me a few tricks as well.

There was a skeptic who was always questioning the banks use of the technology to further their profits and there was a tech lead who was really enjoying programming. We had the support of our customer(the bank) and they loved what we delivered to them every iteration(2 weeks). 

We had a lot of freedom to design and build the application - architecting to work with arcane bank systems, learning how it would scale given customer inflows and more usual application lifecycle matters. We also had the freedom to choose our tools and programming languages. 

The most fun part in this was actually processing the application - which had a ton of rules. Rules that depended on - does this person have a car, do they have a previous loan, do they live in a certain state/county where laws prohibit certain mortgages and so on. Building an efficient rules engine was the most interesting part technically and also the one that would have the most business impact.

We were building this rules engine and realized that the framework we were using would be very heavy and would make our rules engine hard to change once built. A language that allowed to specify these rules in a way that was easily understood and modified by the bank was important. We found a language that could be embedded into the .NET platform and would become a good DSL(Domain specific language) for our purpose - called Boo. Boo could compile itself into .NET could and could run seamlessly along with the rest of the framework. Learning the language, writing tests for it and then showing it to the larger team was always exciting and fun for us.

Here I tell a story about how the best code you wrote will need to go through the CI/CD process, get modified and refactored before it ends up in the final product.

**Your code may never ship**

A story where I wrote some great code, refactored to hearts content but that feature got shelved and never made it into the product. Worse sometimes even the product gets shelved.

**Your code is only a small part of the bigger context**

Another instance where the code was fixed to address the bug but in turn produced a different issue which was more complicated that the bug.

**You may fix the most troubling bug with the best trick in the book …. Although that may not reach the customer**

We came up with a great solution to build the high performance cluster and it tested well although it got changed drastically because it did not work when the customer would try it in their setup - thus completely changing the design in the end

**Build relationships within your team**

How Building relationships within your team can uncover and help you learn about the system outside of just writing and fixing software.

It seems obvious that if you work on a team of people you would need to build some relationships and will have your friends and colleagues. Going beyond being a colleague also happens quite a bit. I will relate one of the stories where forming a bond helped achieve things I never imagined were even in the scope of my assignment.

It was summer of 2007 and I ended up on a project in Atlanta. Working my way through the travel and entering the team dynamics I was not so aware of. It was a large team - made up of 16 developers, 4 product managers, a tech lead and a project manager. This is quite large for an agile team that iterates quickly. So that was a little new to me from my previous assignments. I was getting familiar with how things were being done and how decisions are made and what was important on this project.

**Build relationships with the customer**

Learn from the customer and what they are more passionate about - gives a better perspective than just building clever and smart code

**Build relationships beyond your area of influence**

How relationships with broader team helped understand the mission and purpose of an IC. Also how an IC could work towards being a more impactful contributor.
